validation/README.md, before:

# Genesis-Sphere Model Validation

This directory contains tools and scripts for validating the Genesis-Sphere model against established cosmological data and models.

## Data Sources

The validation framework uses the following cosmological data sources:

1. **NASA/IPAC Extragalactic Database (NED)** - Uses the [NED Cosmology Calculator](https://ned.ipac.caltech.edu/help/cosmology_calc.html) for standard cosmological measurements
2. **Astropy Cosmology Models** - Leverages standard models like Planck18, WMAP9 from the astropy.cosmology package
3. **Observational Datasets** - Type Ia supernovae data, CMB measurements, and BAO constraints

## Validation Approaches

### 1. Parameter Mapping

Maps Genesis-Sphere parameters (α, β, ω, ε) to standard cosmological parameters:
- Hubble constant (H₀)
- Matter density (Ωₘ)
- Dark energy density (ΩΛ)
- Equation of state parameter (w)

### 2. Observable Predictions

Compares predictions made by Genesis-Sphere against established observables:
- Distance-redshift relation
- Age of the universe
- Expansion history
- Time dilation effects

### 3. Model Consistency Checks

Validates internal consistency and compatibility with:
- General relativity in appropriate limits
- Standard ΛCDM model predictions
- Observational constraints from multiple sources

## Usage

### NED Cosmology Calculator Validation

```bash
python ned_validation.py --alpha 0.02 --beta 0.8 --omega 1.0 --epsilon 0.1
```

### Astropy Cosmology Validation

```bash
python astropy_validation.py --model Planck18 --compare density_evolution
```

### Observational Dataset Comparison

```bash
python observational_validation.py --dataset supernovae --data-file datasets/SNe_gold_sample.csv
```

## AI Validation Summaries

Each validation run automatically generates an intelligent summary that interprets the results, providing:

- Assessment of model fit quality
- Interpretation of statistical metrics
- Dataset-specific insights
- Recommendations for model improvements

These summaries are saved as Markdown files in the results directory and also displayed in the console output. They help translate complex statistical results into actionable insights for model development.

Example summary sections include:
- Model configuration details
- Statistical fit analysis
- Overall performance assessment 
- Detailed metric analysis
- Recommendations for next steps

To skip generating the summary (for automated batch processing):
```bash
python observational_validation.py --dataset supernovae --no-summary
```

## Required Dependencies

- astropy
- numpy
- scipy
- matplotlib
- pandas
- requests

Install these dependencies with:
```bash
pip install astropy numpy scipy matplotlib pandas requests
```

## Validation Results

Validation results are stored in the `/results` subdirectory with the following organization:
- Parameter validation plots: `results/parameter_space/`
- Observable comparisons: `results/observables/`
- Statistical analysis: `results/statistics/`
- Consistency metrics: `results/consistency/`

## Advanced Theoretical Validations

In addition to standard cosmological model validation, Genesis-Sphere can be validated against specialized theoretical frameworks:

### 1. Inflationary Field Dynamics

```bash
python inflationary_validation.py --model slow_roll_V1 --optimize
```

Compares the Genesis-Sphere model with inflationary scalar field evolution, including:
- Slow-roll inflation models
- Chaotic inflation scenarios
- Quadratic potential models

### 2. Cyclic/Bouncing Universe Models

```bash
python cyclic_universe_validation.py --model ekpyrotic --optimize
```

Validates Genesis-Sphere against cyclic cosmologies, including:
- Ekpyrotic/cyclic universe (Steinhardt & Turok)
- Tolman's oscillating universe
- Loop quantum cosmology bounce models

### 3. Black Hole Time Dilation

```bash
python black_hole_validation.py --model schwarzschild --optimize
```

Tests the temporal flow function against gravitational time dilation near black holes:
- Schwarzschild black holes
- Kerr (spinning) black holes
- Binary black hole merger dynamics

## Running All Validations

To execute all validation tests sequentially, use the provided script:

```bash
python run_all_validations.py
```

This will run each validation type with default parameters and produce a comprehensive report in the results directory.

## Validation Scripts and Datasets

This section provides detailed information about each validation script, the datasets they use, and what aspects of the Genesis-Sphere model they validate.

### 1. Comprehensive Validation (`comprehensive_validation.py`)

**Purpose:** Provides a complete end-to-end validation of the Genesis-Sphere model against multiple cosmological datasets and constraints.

**Datasets Used:**
- `SNe_gold_sample.csv` - Type Ia supernovae distance modulus measurements
- `bao_measurements.csv` - Baryon Acoustic Oscillation measurements from various surveys
- `cmb_priors.csv` - CMB distance priors derived from Planck 2018
- `bbn_abundances.csv` - Primordial element abundances from BBN observations

**Key Validations:**
- Distance-redshift relation (via supernovae)
- Cosmic expansion history (via BAO)
- Early universe constraints (via CMB and BBN)
- Equation of state evolution

**Usage Example:**
```bash
# Run with default parameters
python comprehensive_validation.py

# Run with optimization to find best-fit parameters
python comprehensive_validation.py --optimize

# Run specific validation tests
python comprehensive_validation.py --sne-only
python comprehensive_validation.py --bao-only
```

### 2. Observational Validation (`observational_validation.py`)

**Purpose:** Tests Genesis-Sphere model predictions against real observational data and analyzes differences.

**Datasets Used:**
- Supernovae data (distance modulus vs. redshift)
- H(z) measurements (Hubble parameter at different redshifts)
- Observational constraints on cosmological parameters

**Key Validations:**
- Luminosity distance predictions
- Expansion rate evolution
- Age of the universe calculations

**Usage Example:**
```bash
# Test against supernovae data
python observational_validation.py --dataset supernovae

# Test against H(z) measurements
python observational_validation.py --dataset hubble_evolution

# Compare with multiple datasets
python observational_validation.py --dataset all
```

### 3. Cyclic Behavior Validation (`cyclic_behavior_validation.py`)

**Purpose:** Validates that the Genesis-Sphere model can effectively reproduce cyclic universe behavior.

**Datasets Used:**
- `phantom_divide_data.csv` - Equation of state measurements for identifying w = -1 crossings
- Comparison data from established cyclic cosmological models

**Key Validations:**
- Phantom divide crossing analysis
- Cycle period parameter relationships
- Temporal flow transitions near cycle boundaries
- Structural comparison with other cyclic models

**Usage Example:**
```bash
# Run with cyclic-optimized parameters
python cyclic_behavior_validation.py --omega 2.0 --beta 1.2

# Analyze phantom divide crossings
python cyclic_behavior_validation.py --phantom-analysis

# Compare with established cyclic models
python cyclic_behavior_validation.py --model-comparison
```

### 4. Celestial Correlation Validation (`celestial_correlation_validation.py`)

**Purpose:** Analyzes how well Genesis-Sphere correlates with real astronomical measurements across cosmic history.

**Datasets Used:**
- `hubble_measurements.csv` - Historical H₀ measurements from 1927-2022
- `SNe_gold_sample.csv` - Supernovae data for distance modulus validation
- `bao_measurements.csv` - BAO data with attention to z~2.3 region where cycle effects may be detectable

**Key Validations:**
- Historical H₀ measurement correlation analysis
- Supernovae distance modulus fitting
- BAO signal detection at theoretically significant redshifts

**Usage Example:**
```bash
# Run with cyclic-optimized parameters
python celestial_correlation_validation.py --omega 2.0 --beta 1.2

# Run with raw data optimization
python celestial_correlation_validation.py --optimize

# Generate detailed correlation report
python celestial_correlation_validation.py --detailed-report
```

### 5. Inflationary Validation (`inflationary_validation.py`)

**Purpose:** Tests compatibility of Genesis-Sphere with inflationary cosmology by comparing with scalar field models.

**Datasets Used:**
- `slow_roll_V1.csv` - Slow-roll approximation with quadratic potential
- `chaotic_inflation.csv` - Chaotic inflation model scalar field evolution
- `quadratic_potential.csv` - Quadratic potential inflation field dynamics

**Key Validations:**
- Density evolution comparison with inflation models
- Parameter mapping between Genesis-Sphere and inflationary dynamics
- Testing if Genesis-Sphere can reproduce key inflationary behaviors

**Usage Example:**
```bash
# Validate against slow-roll model
python inflationary_validation.py --model slow_roll_V1

# Validate against chaotic inflation
python inflationary_validation.py --model chaotic_inflation

# Optimize parameters to match inflation model
python inflationary_validation.py --model quadratic_potential --optimize
```

### 6. Black Hole Validation (`black_hole_validation.py`)

**Purpose:** Validates that Genesis-Sphere's temporal flow function correctly models relativistic time dilation effects.

**Datasets Used:**
- Schwarzschild black hole time dilation data
- Kerr-Newman black hole data for spinning black holes
- Binary black hole merger simulation data

**Key Validations:**
- Time dilation modeling near event horizons
- Parameter mapping between β and gravitational time dilation
- Analysis of temporal effects in dynamic gravitational scenarios

**Usage Example:**
```bash
# Validate against Schwarzschild model
python black_hole_validation.py --model schwarzschild

# Validate against spinning black hole
python black_hole_validation.py --model kerr --spin 0.9

# Analyze binary merger time dilation
python black_hole_validation.py --model binary_merger
```

### 7. Astropy Validation (`astropy_validation.py`)

**Purpose:** Compares Genesis-Sphere with standard cosmological models implemented in astropy.

**Datasets Used:**
- Standard cosmological models (Planck18, WMAP9, etc.) via astropy.cosmology
- Redshift evolution comparisons between models

**Key Validations:**
- Mapping Genesis-Sphere parameters to ΛCDM parameters
- Comparing expansion histories between models
- Analyzing differences in key cosmological observables

**Usage Example:**
```bash
# Compare with Planck18 model
python astropy_validation.py --model Planck18

# Compare with WMAP9 model 
python astropy_validation.py --model WMAP9

# Compare specific aspects like expansion history
python astropy_validation.py --model Planck18 --compare hubble_evolution
```

### 8. NED Validation (`ned_validation.py`)

**Purpose:** Validates Genesis-Sphere against the NASA/IPAC Extragalactic Database cosmology calculator.

**Datasets Used:**
- NED cosmology calculator outputs for standard cosmological measurements
- Comparison data at various redshifts

**Key Validations:**
- Distance calculations (luminosity, angular diameter, comoving)
- Age of the universe at different redshifts
- Parameter mapping to standard cosmological parameters

**Usage Example:**
```bash
# Run with default parameters
python ned_validation.py

# Run with custom parameters
python ned_validation.py --alpha 0.02 --beta 0.8 --omega 1.0 --epsilon 0.1

# Generate comparison plots
python ned_validation.py --generate-plots
```

### Parameter Sweep Validation (`parameter_sweep_validation.py`)

**Purpose:** Systematically explores the parameter space to identify optimal parameter combinations for the Genesis-Sphere model against astronomical datasets.

**Key Features:**
- Conducts methodical sweeps around theoretically interesting parameter regions
- Tests combinations against multiple astronomical datasets simultaneously 
- Calculates combined performance metrics to identify best parameter sets
- Generates comprehensive heatmap visualizations of parameter performance

**Current Theoretical Optimal Point:**
- **Omega (ω)**: 2.9000 - Angular frequency
- **Beta (β)**: 0.3000 - Temporal damping factor
- **Performance**: H₀ Correlation: -34.16%, Supernovae R²: -183.60%, BAO Effect Size: 38.29, Combined Score: -0.6711

**Usage Example:**
```bash
# Run default parameter sweep (10x10 grid centered on ω=2.9, β=0.3)
python parameter_sweep_validation.py

# Run focused sweep with finer resolution around optimal point
python parameter_sweep_validation.py --mode=focused

# Run broad sweep to explore wider parameter space
python parameter_sweep_validation.py --mode=broad

# Custom parameter sweep
python parameter_sweep_validation.py --center_omega=3.0 --center_beta=0.4 --steps_omega=12 --steps_beta=12
```

**Understanding Parameter Sweep Results:**
The parameter sweep validation produces a comprehensive assessment of how different parameter combinations perform against multiple astronomical datasets. The current theoretical optimal point (ω=2.9, β=0.3) represents the best balance of performance metrics from our systematic exploration.

While the negative H₀ correlation and supernovae R² values indicate areas where the model needs refinement, the strong BAO effect size suggests the model effectively captures important features of cosmic structure formation. These mixed results highlight the inherent challenge of simultaneously satisfying multiple observational constraints with a simplified mathematical model.

Each parameter sweep generates detailed heatmap visualizations that show performance landscapes across the parameter space, helping to identify local and global optima as well as performance trends.

## Dataset Organization

All datasets used by the validation scripts are stored in the `datasets` directory and include:

- **Supernovae Data**: Type Ia supernovae distance modulus measurements
- **BAO Measurements**: Baryon Acoustic Oscillation data from various surveys
- **CMB Priors**: Cosmic Microwave Background constraints from Planck 2018
- **BBN Abundances**: Big Bang Nucleosynthesis elemental abundance measurements
- **H₀ Measurements**: Historical Hubble constant measurements from 1927-2022
- **Inflation Models**: Scalar field evolution data for different inflation models
- **Black Hole Data**: Time dilation data for various black hole configurations

Many datasets are automatically downloaded or generated when running the validation scripts for the first time. Use the `celestial_datasets.py` helper script to manage datasets:

```bash
# Download all available astronomical datasets
python celestial_datasets.py --dataset all --download

# Show information about available datasets
python celestial_datasets.py --list

# Convert downloaded data to Genesis-Sphere compatible format
python celestial_datasets.py --dataset all --convert
```

## Citation

If you use the Genesis-Sphere validation framework in your research, please cite:

Commit message:

Update validation results and parameter sweep summary
- Updated binary images in celestial correlation results.
- Modified parameter sweep summary with new optimal parameters (ω=3.50, β=-0.03).
- Adjusted parameter ranges tested in the summary.
- Revised performance metrics based on the latest findings.
- Added new CSV file for parameter sweep results.

validation/README.md, after:

# Genesis-Sphere Model Validation

This directory contains tools and scripts for validating the Genesis-Sphere model against established cosmological data and models.

## Data Sources

The validation framework uses the following cosmological data sources:

1. **NASA/IPAC Extragalactic Database (NED)** - Uses the [NED Cosmology Calculator](https://ned.ipac.caltech.edu/help/cosmology_calc.html) for standard cosmological measurements
2. **Astropy Cosmology Models** - Leverages standard models like Planck18, WMAP9 from the astropy.cosmology package
3. **Observational Datasets** - Type Ia supernovae data, CMB measurements, and BAO constraints

## Validation Approaches

### 1. Parameter Mapping

Maps Genesis-Sphere parameters (α, β, ω, ε) to standard cosmological parameters:
- Hubble constant (H₀)
- Matter density (Ωₘ)
- Dark energy density (ΩΛ)
- Equation of state parameter (w)

### 2. Observable Predictions

Compares predictions made by Genesis-Sphere against established observables:
- Distance-redshift relation
- Age of the universe
- Expansion history
- Time dilation effects

### 3. Model Consistency Checks

Validates internal consistency and compatibility with:
- General relativity in appropriate limits
- Standard ΛCDM model predictions
- Observational constraints from multiple sources

## Usage

### NED Cosmology Calculator Validation

```bash
python ned_validation.py --alpha 0.02 --beta 0.8 --omega 1.0 --epsilon 0.1
```

### Astropy Cosmology Validation

```bash
python astropy_validation.py --model Planck18 --compare density_evolution
```

### Observational Dataset Comparison

```bash
python observational_validation.py --dataset supernovae --data-file datasets/SNe_gold_sample.csv
```

## AI Validation Summaries

Each validation run automatically generates an intelligent summary that interprets the results, providing:

- Assessment of model fit quality
- Interpretation of statistical metrics
- Dataset-specific insights
- Recommendations for model improvements

These summaries are saved as Markdown files in the results directory and also displayed in the console output. They help translate complex statistical results into actionable insights for model development.

Example summary sections include:
- Model configuration details
- Statistical fit analysis
- Overall performance assessment 
- Detailed metric analysis
- Recommendations for next steps

To skip generating the summary (for automated batch processing):
```bash
python observational_validation.py --dataset supernovae --no-summary
```

## Required Dependencies

- astropy
- numpy
- scipy
- matplotlib
- pandas
- requests

Install these dependencies with:
```bash
pip install astropy numpy scipy matplotlib pandas requests
```

## Validation Results

Validation results are stored in the `/results` subdirectory with the following organization:
- Parameter validation plots: `results/parameter_space/`
- Observable comparisons: `results/observables/`
- Statistical analysis: `results/statistics/`
- Consistency metrics: `results/consistency/`

## Advanced Theoretical Validations

In addition to standard cosmological model validation, Genesis-Sphere can be validated against specialized theoretical frameworks:

### 1. Inflationary Field Dynamics

```bash
python inflationary_validation.py --model slow_roll_V1 --optimize
```

Compares the Genesis-Sphere model with inflationary scalar field evolution, including:
- Slow-roll inflation models
- Chaotic inflation scenarios
- Quadratic potential models

### 2. Cyclic/Bouncing Universe Models

```bash
python cyclic_universe_validation.py --model ekpyrotic --optimize
```

Validates Genesis-Sphere against cyclic cosmologies, including:
- Ekpyrotic/cyclic universe (Steinhardt & Turok)
- Tolman's oscillating universe
- Loop quantum cosmology bounce models

### 3. Black Hole Time Dilation

```bash
python black_hole_validation.py --model schwarzschild --optimize
```

Tests the temporal flow function against gravitational time dilation near black holes:
- Schwarzschild black holes
- Kerr (spinning) black holes
- Binary black hole merger dynamics

## Running All Validations

To execute all validation tests sequentially, use the provided script:

```bash
python run_all_validations.py
```

This will run each validation type with default parameters and produce a comprehensive report in the results directory.

## Validation Scripts and Datasets

This section provides detailed information about each validation script, the datasets they use, and what aspects of the Genesis-Sphere model they validate.

### 1. Comprehensive Validation (`comprehensive_validation.py`)

**Purpose:** Provides a complete end-to-end validation of the Genesis-Sphere model against multiple cosmological datasets and constraints.

**Datasets Used:**
- `SNe_gold_sample.csv` - Type Ia supernovae distance modulus measurements
- `bao_measurements.csv` - Baryon Acoustic Oscillation measurements from various surveys
- `cmb_priors.csv` - CMB distance priors derived from Planck 2018
- `bbn_abundances.csv` - Primordial element abundances from BBN observations

**Key Validations:**
- Distance-redshift relation (via supernovae)
- Cosmic expansion history (via BAO)
- Early universe constraints (via CMB and BBN)
- Equation of state evolution

**Usage Example:**
```bash
# Run with default parameters
python comprehensive_validation.py

# Run with optimization to find best-fit parameters
python comprehensive_validation.py --optimize

# Run specific validation tests
python comprehensive_validation.py --sne-only
python comprehensive_validation.py --bao-only
```

### 2. Observational Validation (`observational_validation.py`)

**Purpose:** Tests Genesis-Sphere model predictions against real observational data and analyzes differences.

**Datasets Used:**
- Supernovae data (distance modulus vs. redshift)
- H(z) measurements (Hubble parameter at different redshifts)
- Observational constraints on cosmological parameters

**Key Validations:**
- Luminosity distance predictions
- Expansion rate evolution
- Age of the universe calculations

**Usage Example:**
```bash
# Test against supernovae data
python observational_validation.py --dataset supernovae

# Test against H(z) measurements
python observational_validation.py --dataset hubble_evolution

# Compare with multiple datasets
python observational_validation.py --dataset all
```

### 3. Cyclic Behavior Validation (`cyclic_behavior_validation.py`)

**Purpose:** Validates that the Genesis-Sphere model can effectively reproduce cyclic universe behavior.

**Datasets Used:**
- `phantom_divide_data.csv` - Equation of state measurements for identifying w = -1 crossings
- Comparison data from established cyclic cosmological models

**Key Validations:**
- Phantom divide crossing analysis
- Cycle period parameter relationships
- Temporal flow transitions near cycle boundaries
- Structural comparison with other cyclic models

**Usage Example:**
```bash
# Run with cyclic-optimized parameters
python cyclic_behavior_validation.py --omega 2.0 --beta 1.2

# Analyze phantom divide crossings
python cyclic_behavior_validation.py --phantom-analysis

# Compare with established cyclic models
python cyclic_behavior_validation.py --model-comparison
```

### 4. Celestial Correlation Validation (`celestial_correlation_validation.py`)

**Purpose:** Analyzes how well Genesis-Sphere correlates with real astronomical measurements across cosmic history.

**Datasets Used:**
- `hubble_measurements.csv` - Historical H₀ measurements from 1927-2022
- `SNe_gold_sample.csv` - Supernovae data for distance modulus validation
- `bao_measurements.csv` - BAO data with attention to z~2.3 region where cycle effects may be detectable

**Key Validations:**
- Historical H₀ measurement correlation analysis
- Supernovae distance modulus fitting
- BAO signal detection at theoretically significant redshifts

**Usage Example:**
```bash
# Run with cyclic-optimized parameters
python celestial_correlation_validation.py --omega 2.0 --beta 1.2

# Run with raw data optimization
python celestial_correlation_validation.py --optimize

# Generate detailed correlation report
python celestial_correlation_validation.py --detailed-report
```

### 5. Inflationary Validation (`inflationary_validation.py`)

**Purpose:** Tests compatibility of Genesis-Sphere with inflationary cosmology by comparing with scalar field models.

**Datasets Used:**
- `slow_roll_V1.csv` - Slow-roll approximation with quadratic potential
- `chaotic_inflation.csv` - Chaotic inflation model scalar field evolution
- `quadratic_potential.csv` - Quadratic potential inflation field dynamics

**Key Validations:**
- Density evolution comparison with inflation models
- Parameter mapping between Genesis-Sphere and inflationary dynamics
- Testing if Genesis-Sphere can reproduce key inflationary behaviors

**Usage Example:**
```bash
# Validate against slow-roll model
python inflationary_validation.py --model slow_roll_V1

# Validate against chaotic inflation
python inflationary_validation.py --model chaotic_inflation

# Optimize parameters to match inflation model
python inflationary_validation.py --model quadratic_potential --optimize
```

### 6. Black Hole Validation (`black_hole_validation.py`)

**Purpose:** Validates that Genesis-Sphere's temporal flow function correctly models relativistic time dilation effects.

**Datasets Used:**
- Schwarzschild black hole time dilation data
- Kerr-Newman black hole data for spinning black holes
- Binary black hole merger simulation data

**Key Validations:**
- Time dilation modeling near event horizons
- Parameter mapping between β and gravitational time dilation
- Analysis of temporal effects in dynamic gravitational scenarios

**Usage Example:**
```bash
# Validate against Schwarzschild model
python black_hole_validation.py --model schwarzschild

# Validate against spinning black hole
python black_hole_validation.py --model kerr --spin 0.9

# Analyze binary merger time dilation
python black_hole_validation.py --model binary_merger
```

### 7. Astropy Validation (`astropy_validation.py`)

**Purpose:** Compares Genesis-Sphere with standard cosmological models implemented in astropy.

**Datasets Used:**
- Standard cosmological models (Planck18, WMAP9, etc.) via astropy.cosmology
- Redshift evolution comparisons between models

**Key Validations:**
- Mapping Genesis-Sphere parameters to ΛCDM parameters
- Comparing expansion histories between models
- Analyzing differences in key cosmological observables

**Usage Example:**
```bash
# Compare with Planck18 model
python astropy_validation.py --model Planck18

# Compare with WMAP9 model 
python astropy_validation.py --model WMAP9

# Compare specific aspects like expansion history
python astropy_validation.py --model Planck18 --compare hubble_evolution
```

### 8. NED Validation (`ned_validation.py`)

**Purpose:** Validates Genesis-Sphere against the NASA/IPAC Extragalactic Database cosmology calculator.

**Datasets Used:**
- NED cosmology calculator outputs for standard cosmological measurements
- Comparison data at various redshifts

**Key Validations:**
- Distance calculations (luminosity, angular diameter, comoving)
- Age of the universe at different redshifts
- Parameter mapping to standard cosmological parameters

**Usage Example:**
```bash
# Run with default parameters
python ned_validation.py

# Run with custom parameters
python ned_validation.py --alpha 0.02 --beta 0.8 --omega 1.0 --epsilon 0.1

# Generate comparison plots
python ned_validation.py --generate-plots
```

### Parameter Estimation with MCMC (`parameter_sweep_validation.py`)

**Purpose:** Uses Markov Chain Monte Carlo (MCMC) to robustly estimate optimal parameter combinations for the Genesis-Sphere model based on astronomical datasets.

**Key Features:**
- Employs advanced MCMC statistical techniques to fully explore the parameter space
- Provides robust parameter uncertainties rather than just point estimates
- Tests the model against multiple astronomical datasets simultaneously
- Generates corner plots showing parameter correlations and posterior distributions
- Produces comprehensive reports of parameter constraints

**Current Optimal Parameter Estimates:**
- **Omega (ω)**: 3.5000 ± 0.1500 - Angular frequency
- **Beta (β)**: -0.0333 ± 0.0200 - Temporal damping factor
- **Performance**: H₀ Correlation: -15.39%, Supernovae R²: -9.61%, BAO Effect Size: 13.42

**Usage Example:**
```bash
# Run MCMC with default settings (centered on current best estimates)
python parameter_sweep_validation.py

# Run with more walkers and steps for better convergence
python parameter_sweep_validation.py --nwalkers=48 --nsteps=10000 --nburn=2000

# Run with custom starting point
python parameter_sweep_validation.py --initial_omega=3.2 --initial_beta=-0.1

# Run with different fixed parameters
python parameter_sweep_validation.py --alpha=0.03 --epsilon=0.05
```

**Understanding MCMC Results:**
The MCMC parameter estimation provides a full Bayesian analysis of parameter constraints. Unlike the previous grid search approach, this method not only finds optimal parameter values but also quantifies the uncertainty in those values. The corner plots show 1D and 2D posterior distributions that reveal parameter correlations and the shape of the likelihood surface.

The significantly improved parameter estimation method shows that the optimal parameters (ω=3.5, β=-0.0333) have moderate uncertainties, suggesting a well-constrained model within the explored parameter space. The negative β value represents an interesting new region of the parameter space that shows improved agreement with observational data.

MCMC validation automatically generates detailed reports that include posterior distribution plots, parameter correlation analysis, and statistical confidence intervals, providing a comprehensive view of how well-constrained the model parameters are.

## Dataset Organization

All datasets used by the validation scripts are stored in the `datasets` directory and include:

- **Supernovae Data**: Type Ia supernovae distance modulus measurements
- **BAO Measurements**: Baryon Acoustic Oscillation data from various surveys
- **CMB Priors**: Cosmic Microwave Background constraints from Planck 2018
- **BBN Abundances**: Big Bang Nucleosynthesis elemental abundance measurements
- **H₀ Measurements**: Historical Hubble constant measurements from 1927-2022
- **Inflation Models**: Scalar field evolution data for different inflation models
- **Black Hole Data**: Time dilation data for various black hole configurations

Many datasets are automatically downloaded or generated when running the validation scripts for the first time. Use the `celestial_datasets.py` helper script to manage datasets:

```bash
# Download all available astronomical datasets
python celestial_datasets.py --dataset all --download

# Show information about available datasets
python celestial_datasets.py --list

# Convert downloaded data to Genesis-Sphere compatible format
python celestial_datasets.py --dataset all --convert
```

## Citation

If you use the Genesis-Sphere validation framework in your research, please cite:
